Relationship between electrohysterogram and internal uterine pressure:
a preliminary study
C. Rabotti*, M. Mischi*, J. O. E. H. van Laar**, P. Aelen*, S. G. Oei**, and J. W. M. Bergmans*
Abstract— Electrohysterography (EHG) is a promising tech-
nique for monitoring the uterine activity, based on electrical
recordings on the abdominal surface. However, a quantitative
estimation of the internal uterine pressure (IUP) by means of
EHG is not available for clinical practice. In this paper we
present a preliminary study on the estimation of the mechanical
uterine activity from abdominal EHG measurements. For the
EHG analysis we use two different Time Frequency Distribu-
tions (TFD): the spectrogram and the Wigner-Ville Distribution.
We assume the EHG to be the sum of frequency modulated
signals. Based on this assumption, the IUP is estimated from
the unnormalized ﬁrst moment of the TFD. Eventually, a third
order polynomial model is applied to the estimated IUP in order
to improve the estimate accuracy. A recent method for detection
of uterine contraction by EHG is employed for comparison of
the performance. The algorithms were tested on two patient
recordings. The results were compared with a reference IUP
which is simultaneously measured by an intrauterine catheter.
The IUP estimated by our method showed a correlation
coefﬁcient with the reference IUP (R= 0.93) higher than that
achieved by the comparison method (R= 0.85). Therefore the
proposed method may be considered as a promising clinical
technique for accurate non invasive IUP measurements.
I. INTRODUCTION
Preterm birth is a major factor for long-term morbidity
and accounts for between 69% and 85% of neonatal deaths
not caused by congenital malformations [1]. One of the keys
to treat preterm labor is early detection and prediction by
monitoring the uterine activity.
Besides the more traditional methods employing pelvic
examination and symptomatic self monitoring, tocography
is currently the most widely used technique to monitor the
activity of the uterus during pregnancy and parturition [2].
The primary advantage of a tocodynamometer consists of
its non invasiveness. Nevertheless, tocography is affected
by a high level of inaccuracy. Additionally, the use of
tocodynamometer can only provide information related to
the frequency of the contractions and does not involve any
direct or indirect measure of uterine functionality, such as
force or efﬁciency of the contractions.
Quantitative information concerning uterine contraction
can be provided by measuring the internal uterine pressure
(IUP) with an intrauterine catheter. However, this technique
requires the rupture of the membranes and, due to its high
invasiveness, it can increase the risk of infections.
This work was supported by the Dutch Technology Fundation, STW.
* C. Rabotti, M. Mischi, P. Aelen, and J. W. M. Bergmans are with the
department of Electrical Engineering, University of Technology Eindhoven,
Eindhoven, the Netherlands.
**J. O. E. H. van Laar and S. G. Oei are with the M´axima Medisch
Centrum, Veldhoven, The Netherlands.
Electrohysterography (EHG) records the bioelectrical sig-
nal associated to muscle contraction. Therefore, it is an al-
ternative non-invasive method to monitor the uterine activity.
It has been demonstrated that the uterine electromyographic
signal originated from action potentials can be measured
from the mother’s abdomen with contact electrodes [3]. The
action potentials are strictly related to the contractile func-
tions of the muscle. Synchronization between mechanical
activity and electrical abdominal signal has been extensively
demonstrated in literature, in particular, an increase of the
IUP is the result of the simultaneous contraction of an ade-
quate number of cells. However, a mathematical description
of the relationship between the electrohysterographic signal
recorded from the abdomen and the IUP during pregnancy
and parturition is not yet available. The availability of
this mathematical description could allow non invasive IUP
assessment.
In this paper we investigate the relationship between the
uterine electrohysterographic signal measured on the mother
abdomen and the IUP simultaneously measured with an
intrauterine catheter during non active labor. The aim of
this study is the development of a mathematical model
for the estimation of the IUP from electrohysterographic
recordings. The EHG signal is analyzed by means of two
Time-Frequency distributions (TFD): the spectrogram and
the Wigner-Ville Distribution (VWD). Differently from [4],
where the EHG is considered as originated by a single FM
process, we regard the EHG as originated by a summation
of FM signals related to the IUP. In fact, because the
EHG is recorded by surface electrodes, it is the result of a
spatial summation of action potentials from different origins.
Therefore, the unnormalized ﬁrst moment of the TFD in a
selected frequency band is used to estimate the instantaneous
frequency and detect the onset of contractions. Eventually, a
polynomial model is proposed to minimize the mean square
error between the estimated IUP and the IUP measured
with the catheter. In this preliminary study a third order
polynomial model is adopted with promising results. The
only method found in literature for a quantitative analysis of
contraction patterns is described in [5]. This method, which is
based on the calculation of the RMS value of the EHG signal
in a selected frequency band, is used to validate our method
by comparison of the performance. The IUP estimated by our
method showed a correlation coefﬁcient with the reference
IUP (R= 0.93) higher than that achieved by the comparison
method (R= 0.85), conﬁrming the better performance of our
algorithm and the possibility of non invasive IUP assessment
by EHG.
Proceedings of the 28th IEEE
EMBS Annual International Conference
New York City, USA, Aug 30-Sept 3, 2006
ThEP2.5
1-4244-0033-3/06/$20.00 ©2006 IEEE.
1661
II. METHODOLOGY
A. Experimental set-up
Our method has been tested on 2 measurements recorded
on two women during non active labor at the M´axima Med-
ical Center in Veldhoven (The Nethelands). Each recording
consists of about 15 minutes of data. The EHG was measured
by means of 11 unipolar contact Ag-AgCl electrodes placed
on the mother’s abdomen as shown in Fig. 1. The reference
for the electrodes was on the right mother’s ankle. This
conﬁguration is chosen to cover as much of the uterus as pos-
sible and, eventually, to determine the electrode position that
shows the largest signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). An intrauterine
pressure catheter Koala M1333A (Philips) was inserted in
the uterine cavity for the IUP measurement. The IUP and
the EHG are simultaneously recorded and digitized at a
sampling rate of 500 Hz with a Maastricht-Programmable
AcQuisitionsystem (M-PAQ).
Fig. 1.
Electrode conﬁguration
B. Signal pre-processing
The unipolar recordings are made bipolar digitally, by
subtracting the signal of contiguous electrodes. Bipolar elec-
trodes reﬂect the differences between the two signals present
below the electrodes. Therefore, in most cases the com-
mon noise such as the maternal electrocardiogram, maternal
movements, and power line interference may be efﬁciently
rejected [6]. Furthermore, as the uterine electrohysterogram
frequency content ranges between 0 and 5 Hz [6], the
digital analysis of the signal can be performed at a sampling
frequency close to 10 Hz. Therefore, the acquired signal
is downsampled by a factor 5, after applying an atialiasing
Finite Impulse response (FIR) ﬁlter with a cut-off frequency
at 5 Hz.
C. Signal analysis
The measured EHG signal is not stationary. An ordinary
Fourier Transform integrates all the frequency components
over the whole observation interval. Because of this aver-
aging, the time discrimination is lost. The use of a Time-
Frequency Distribution (TFD) is a proper solution to this
problem.
Since we measure electrical energy, which is a quadratic
signal, the class of quadratic TFDs is used. The TFD ρz(t, f)
can be seen as the Fourier transform in the lag variable τ of
a weighted non stationary autocorrelation [7]:
ρz(t, f) =
+∞

−∞
+∞

−∞
+∞

−∞
g(ν,τ)z(t + τ
2)z∗(t −τ
2)×
e j2π(νt−νu−fτ)dudνdτ,
(1)
where the Doppler-lag kernel g(ν,τ) deﬁnes a frequency
weighting and time averaging function. The signal z(t) is
the analytic associate of the measured signal s(t), i.e., the
negative part of the frequency spectrum is removed to sup-
press cross terms in ρz(t, f). The Doppler-lag signal kernel
g(ν,τ) determines the main properties of the resulting TFD.
In this study two different signal kernels are used. The ﬁrst
kernel is simply g(ν,τ) = 1. The use of this kernel results
in the Wigner-Ville Distribution (WVD) as given in (2):
ρz(t, f) =
+∞

−∞
z(t + τ
2)z∗(t −τ
2)e−j2π fτdτ.
(2)
The second one is the signal kernel g(ν,τ) =
+∞

−∞
w(t +
τ
2)w(t −τ
2)e−j2πνtdt, which results in the widely used spec-
trogram as given in (3):
ρz(t, f) =

+∞

−∞
z(τ)w(τ −t)e−j2π fτdτ

2
.
(3)
The choice of the spectrogram involves a compromise be-
tween time and frequency resolution. In our measurements a
window of 40 seconds provides the best results in terms of
IUP estimation.
D. Instantaneous frequency
The uterine EMG can be described as a series of action
potentials, whose frequency can be related to the phase of
the mechanical activity. These variations can be seen as a
frequency modulation phenomenon where the modulating
signal is related to the evolution of the IUP. However, the
EHG is not a clear mono component signal, and the signal
in each electrode can be viewed as the result of a sum of
FM signals. Therefore, a measure of contractile strength, i.e.,
the instantaneous frequency, can be provided by the average
frequency. This average frequency is calculated by the ﬁrst
moment in frequency domain of ρ(t, f) as given in (4):
Ω(t) =
+∞

−∞
fρ(t, f)d f
+∞

−∞
ρ(t, f)d f
.
(4)
Because of the spatial integration of FM signals, also the
amplitude of the EHG contains information about the IUP.
The TFD integrated in frequency provides the instantaneous
power as given in (5):
p(t) =
+∞

−∞
ρ(t, f)d f.
(5)
1662
By multiplying equation (4) and (5) a new feature ψ(t) is ob-
tained with information about both amplitude and frequency
of ρ(t, f):
ψ(t) = Ω(t)· p(t) =
fmax

fmin
fρ(t, f)d f.
(6)
The feature ψ(t) obtained by (6) is the unnormalized ﬁrst
moment in frequency of ρ(t, f), and it will be evaluated
to estimate the IUP. The ﬁrst moment is evaluated in a
selected frequency band [fmin, fmax], which is experimentally
determined to maximize the ﬁnal correlation coefﬁcient with
the reference IUP. The frequency range in which the best
results are obtained, differs for the two TFDs. For the WVD
the frequency range from 0.7 Hz to 2.4 Hz gives the best
results and for the spectrogram this range goes from 0.2 Hz
to 1.1 Hz, independently from the considered electrode.
Nevertheless, the performance of the WVD is less inﬂuenced
by the chosen frequency band.
E. Multiple regression
The unnormalized ﬁrst moment obtained with the de-
scribed algorithm can be further processed in order to
increase the accuracy of the estimated IUP. To this end, we
adopted a model which takes into account the offset, gain,
and non linear effects describing the relationship between
the electrical and the mechanical activity of the uterus. Two
different factors can cause these non linearities: the local
meaning of electrical recordings and the possible conse-
quences of muscle fatigue. The ﬁrst factor can be explained
considering that each electrode records the electrical activity
localized below or in the neighborhood of the electrode
position. Nevertheless, the IUP increase is the result of the
simultaneous contraction of an adequate number of cells, and
it is associated to a widespread electrical activity of the whole
uterine muscle. Therefore, localized or unsynchronized elec-
trical activities can be recorded by the neighboring electrodes
without being necessarily followed by a linearly related IUP
increase. The second factor which can cause a non linear
relation between mechanical and electrical uterine activity is
muscle fatigue. In fact, it is plausible, due to muscle fatigue
during labor, that the production of lactate inhibits a proper
muscle reaction to the electrical activation.
We indicate by Ψk = (ψ(t1),ψ(t2),...,ψ(tN)) the digitized
instantaneous frequency calculated in each channel k and
by Y = (y(t1),y(t2),...,y(tN)) the sampled IUP measured by
the catheter. Due to the propagation delay of the electric
signal through the electrodes, the instantaneous frequency is
ﬁrst temporally aligned to Y by maximization of the cross-
correlation function. After alignment, the IUP is represented
by a polynomial expansion of Ψ with coefﬁcients a, b, c,
and d ∈R as given in (7):
Yk = a+bΨk +cΨk2 +dΨk3.
(7)
In (7) a models the offset, b the gain, and c and d the
nonlinearities of the relationship between the estimated IUP
and the reference IUP in each channel k.
The values of a, b, c and d are estimated by a least squares
method as given in (8), where εk is the squared error to be
minimized and N is the number of samples:
εk =
N
∑
i=1

y(ti)−[a+bψ(ti)+cψ(ti)2 +dψ(ti)3]
2
.
(8)
By deﬁning the matrix
X =
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎣
1
ψ(t1)
ψ(t1)2
ψ(t1)3
1
ψ(t2)
ψ(t2)2
ψ(t2)3
...
...
...
...
1
ψ(tN)
ψ(tN)2
ψ(tN)3
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎦,
and parameter vector P = [a
b
c
d], the optimal least
squares solution [8] is found by (9):
ˆP = (XtX)−1XtY
(9)
If the value of ˆP is consistent through all the measurements,
it can be used to improve modeling and estimation of IUP
from EHG signals.
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The IUP was estimated with the proposed method in each
bipolar channel. The quality of the estimation is assessed by
calculating the correlation coefﬁcient (R) with the IUP simul-
taneously measured by the intrauterine catheter. Our method
is validated by comparing its performance with a reference
method [5]. With the proposed method, a good estimation
of the IUP can be obtained by almost all the electrodes,
as long as they are above the corpus uteri. Nevertheless,
electrode placement along the the vertical median axis is
likely to provide a better SNR because of a closer contact
and a more constant position of the uterus relative to the
abdominal wall during contractions [6]. In our recordings,
the best results are obtained in the electrodes in the lower
vertical median axis of the abdomen. In particular, the ﬁnal
results showed in Fig. 2, Fig. 3, and Fig. 4 are obtained by the
same bipolar electrode (9-6). This demonstrates that the use
of a subset of electrodes is sufﬁcient. Additionally, though
both the spectrogram and WVD provide a high correlation
with the reference IUP, the WVD gives a better signal when
there is no contraction (Fig. 3), and it is therefore to be
preferred. The results in terms of correlation coefﬁcient are
shown in Table I for the bipolar electrode 9-6. The reference
algorithm results in the poorest estimates.
A preliminary evaluation of the coefﬁcients of the poly-
nomial model was performed on the two available mea-
surements during non active labor. In the examined cases,
c and d, i.e., the coefﬁcients of the non-linear terms, are
negligible and polynomial models of the second and third
order provide similar error εk. This result was expected due
to the early stage of labor of the two examined cases. At
this stage, in fact, the electrical activity of the uterus is well
established and sufﬁciently coordinated to produce efﬁcient
contractions, i.e., each detected electrical burst is followed
by a proportional IUP increase. Moreover, muscular fatigue
is not expected at this early stage of labor. We could however
1663
 100 
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
time(s)
Pressure (a.u)
Fig. 2. Dashed line: IUP measured by the catheter. Solid line: IUP estimated
by our method in the bipolar electrode 9-6 using the spectrogram.
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
time (s)
Pressure (a.u.)
Fig. 3. Dashed line: IUP measured by the catheter. Solid line: IUP estimated
by our method in the bipolar electrode 9-6 using the WVD
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
time (s)
Pressure (a.u)
Fig. 4. Dashed line: IUP measured by the catheter. Solid line: IUP estimated
by the algorithm [5] in the bipolar electrode 9-6.
expect the non linear terms of the polynomial model to
be more signiﬁcant during pregnancy, or in more advanced
stages of labor.
TABLE I
CORRELATION WITH THE REFERENCE IUP
Method
Correlation coefﬁcient R (p)
Spectrogram
0.93
(<0.001)
Wigner Ville
0.88
(<0.001)
Reference
0.85
(<0.001)
IV. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS
In this paper we describe a preliminary study on the rela-
tionship between the uterine mechanical activity as recorded
by an intra-uterine catheter and the mechanical activity
estimated by processing the electrohysterographic signal
recorded from the abdominal surface. A novel approach is
proposed for the estimation of the IUP and a polynomial
model is adopted to optimize the estimate. The method pro-
duces accurate results with a correlation coefﬁcient R=0.93.
These promising results suggest the possibility to propose
EHG as a valid alternative to the existing techniques, which
can potentially combine the non invasiveness of tocographic
measurement with the accuracy of an IUP measurement
device. In the two examined cases during non active labor,
the relationship between the reference and estimated IUP is
well approximated by a linear relationship. Nevertheless, we
expect this relation to be non linear in case of non-efﬁcient
contractions or in case of muscle fatigue. The TFDs that
are used in this study are the WVD and the spectrogram,
where the results for the WVD are slightly better. Future
work will involve the investigation of other time frequency
techniques and, if required, the development of a signal
dependent kernel. In general, extensive experimentation will
be necessary to broadly validate our method and to determine
the parameters of our polynomial model.
REFERENCES
[1] G. S. Berkowitz and E. Papiernik , ”Epidemiology of preterm birth”,
Epid. Rev., vol. 15, 1993, pp 414-443.
[2] R. E. Garﬁeld, H. Maul, W. Maner, C. Fittkow, G. Olson, L. Shi, and
G. R. Saade, ”Uterine electromyography and light-induced ﬂuores-
cence in the management of term and preterm labor”, J. Soc. Gynecol.
Investig., vol. 9, 2002, pp 265-275.
[3] C. Buhimschi and R. E. Garﬁeld , ”Uterine contractility as assessed by
abdominal surface recording of electromyograﬁc activity in rats during
pregancy”, Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol., vol. 174, 1996, pp 744-753.
[4] S. Mansour, D. Devedeux, J. Duchˆene, G. Germain, and C. Marque,
”Uterine EMG spectral characteristics and instantaneous frequency
measurement”, IEEE EMBS Proc., 1992, pp 2602-2603.
[5] J. Jezewski and K. Horoba and A.Matonia and J. Wrobel, ”Quantitative
analysis of contraction patterns in electrical activity signal of pregnant
uterus as an alternative to mechanical approach”, Physiol. Meas., vol.
26, 2005, pp 753-767.
[6] D. Devedeux, C. Marque, S. Mansour, G. Germain, and J. Duchˆene,
”Uterine EMG analysis: a critical review”, Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol.,
vol. 169, 1993, pp 1636-1653.
[7] B. Boashash, Time frequency signal analysis and processing: a com-
prehensive reference, Elsevier; 2003.
[8] D. G. Manolakis, V. K. Ingle, and S. M. Kogon , Statistical and
adaptive signal processing, Artech house, Boston; 2005.
[9] H. Kwakernaak and R. Sivan, Modern signals and systems, Prentice
Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ; 1991.
1664
